# How the World Really Works

[Smil Vaclav. 2022. *How the World Really Works : The Science Behind How We Got Here and Where We're Going* First North American ed. New York: Viking.](https://worldcat.org/en/title/1312328649)

[TOC]



# 1. Understanding Energy
In 2020, the average USA citizen consumes the same energy equivalent to having 240 adults working non-stop, day and night. 

Energy:  The capacity for doing work.
Forms of Energy: Kinetic, Heat, Elastic, Electrical, Chemical, Radiant, Nuclear, Mass

Energy Substitutions:

- some easy:  candle to light (chemical energy of wax transformed into radiant energy), electric lights powered by electricity generated by steam engines (the chemical energy of fuels transformed into heat, and then into electric energy, and then into radiant energy)

- some difficult: product of nitrogenous fertilizers, requires synthesis of ammonia depends on natural gas as the source for hydrogen.  Hydrogen can come from electrolysis of water, but this is 5X more expensive than deriving hydrogen from methane (natural gas).  A long-distance transatlantic commercial aircraft using electricity powered-flight is unrealistic.

- energy (scalar), not to be conflated with power (energy per unit of time). 
- energy densities : critical for energy storage and portability

## Energy Density Ladder

- see [Energy Density - Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Energy_density)
- Aviation Kerosene
- Natural Gas: Natural gas (methane) is 3-orders of magnitude lower than that of aviation kerosene (a liquid fuel).  LIquid fuels have high-energy density.
- Ocean liners did not burn wood because it would require 2.5X the volume of bituminous coal, and by 50% heaver.

### Crude Oil

Crude oil:  Refinement produces specific fuels (gasoline - lightest, and residual fuel oil - heaviest), and also lubricants, and asphalt (paving and roofing).

- production of crude oil started in 1850's Russian, Canada and the US.    Discovery of giant oil fields in Middle East and USSR in 1920's.  Most discovered post WWII (Saudi Arabia primarily).  Largest Russian ones discovered in 1948 and 1965.
- crude oil was so cheap, there were no incentives to use it efficiently (single glazed window, no insulation, ...)
- 1950 US produced 50% of world's crude oil.
- 1960 Opec
- 1971 : Algeria, Libya, Iraq, Kuwait, Qatar and Saudi Arabia nationalized their oil fields.
- 1973 OPEC raised price of oil to $3.01/barrel, followed by 17% raise by six Arab Gulf states.
- 1973 Israeli victory over Egypt in Sinai; OPEC embargos all oil exports to US.  [^1]
- Two waves of oil price rises:
	- 1974 Oil @ 11.65/barrel - 450% rise in one year:  End era of rapid economic expansion
	- 1978 Fall of Iranian monarchy, takeover of Iran by a fundamentalist theocracy.  Oil went from $13 to $34/barrel from 1978 to 1981. 
- 1986 $13/barrel: Globalization centered around China.  Deng Xiaoping economic reforms and massive foreign investment.  

### Electricity 

Electricity is difficult to store, had high costs to produce and has many technical challenges (transformers, transmission lines, final use devices).  There are many benefits of electricity:

- the use of electricity at final consumption is effortless and clean
- exceptionally efficient
- no bukly storage
- no carrying and stoking
- no dangers of incomplete combustion releasing poisonous gas (CO2)
- no clean-up of lamps, stoves, furnace

The service sector dominates the modern economy, and is reliant on electricity (elevators, trash compactors, mobile phone/vibrator motor (4mm x 3mm), electric pumps for water supply).

Electrification:  Converting fuels to electricity.

### Decarbonization

Based on known discoveries coal can last another 120 years and oil gas another 50 years.  

The carbon neutrality discussion relies on a yet to be discovered mass technology to capture and store carbon indefinitely.   Planting trees is a temporary measure.   

Nations are decarbonizing electricity, however electricity is only a fraction of the nation's total energy demand.  Nations like Denmark have about 45% of electricity generated by renewables (wind), but Denmark relies on Sweden (nuclear, wind) and Germany (various) to cover shortfalls on generation.   Larger countries, like Germany, cannot rely on Denmark, as Germany's demand is 20X that of Denmark, and Denmark would be unable to provide sufficient electricity to cover Germany's shortfall.

Transmission of electricity across a nation is difficult, and in USA/Canada there are no suitable long-terms plans.  Difficulties include infrastructure costs, not-in-my-backyard easements.

Nuclear can operate 90% of the time.  USA/Canada had small, safe, modular reactors of the 1980's, but these have not been commercialized.  The access to cheap natural gas has lowered the need for nuclear.

China, India and South Korea are committed to nuclear.   Whereas Germany has committed to be nuclear free by 2022. 

Storage of Electricity.  The only viable storage is a Pump Hydro Storage (PHS) system which on off-hours pumps water to a higher elevation to then allow it to fall again in the peak demand.  This uses about the 25% of the generated electricity, and relies on natural elevation for the storage.  The most efficient batteries (Li-Ion) are able to store about 400 Watt-hours/kilogram (Wh/kg).   This is about 40X the energy-per-kilogram of jet kerosene (12,000 Wh/kg).

Fossil fuels still provide the majority of the total energy demand:

| Nation  | Fossil Fuel Percent of Total Demand |
| ------- | ----------------------------------- |
| Germany | 78%                                 |
| China   | 85%                                 |
| Japan   | 90% : Fukushima loss                |

Global fossil consumption is 10 billion tons/year (10,000,000,000 tons/year).   This is two-times the mass of water consumed by the global population of 8 billion people.   Any rapid substitution is impossible; this is an engineering and scientific reality.

Long-term energy supply scenarios:   Stated Policies scenario published by International Energy Agency (IEA) predics fossible fuels share of global deman declining from 2019 80% to 72% by 2040.  

- The IEA's Sustainable Development Scenario sees fossil fuels supplying 56% of global primary energy demand by 2040.  This is the most aggressive decarbonization scenario. [^2]

# Food Production

The percent of undernourished people globally has decreased in the last 70-years while the population has increased.  From 1950 to 2019 there has been an 8-fold increase in our ability to fee the global population.

| Year | % of undernourished people | Global Population |
| ---- | -------------------------- | ----------------- |
| 1950 | 65%                        | 2.5 billion       |
| 1970 | 25%                        |                   |
| 2000 | 15%                        |                   |
| 2019 | 9%                         | 7.7 billion       |

This food increase is attributable to two kinds of energy:

- sun
- fossil fuels & electricity generated by humans

Fossil fuels and electricity contribute:

- directly: fuel to power machinery, harvesters, tractors, irrigation pumps
- indirectly: full/electricity to produce machinery, fertilizers, agrochemicals (herbicides, insecticides, fungicides), glass and plastics for greenhouses and GPS for precision farming.

## Two Centuries Ago

A shift (epochal) the addition of non-solar forms of energy began to affect crop production, and later the capture of wild marine species.   Case study on USA (could have chosen China, Japan, East Asia, ...)

1801: Wheat grown in NY same way as in England and similar to ancient Egypt 2,000 years ago.

- planting:
  - two oxen, wooden plow with iron plate
  - seed from last year's crop, sown by hand
  - brush harrows used to cover seeds
  - 27 hours labour / hectare, 35 ox hours
- harvest (securing the crop):
  - cut with sickles
  - stalks bundled and tied manually in sheaves
  - stacked upright to make shocks or stooks
  - left to dry
  - hauled to barn, and threshed by flailing them on a hard floor
  - straw is stacked
  - grain is winnowed (separated from the chaff), measured and put into sacks
  - 120 hours labour / hectare, 35 ox hours
  - 83% of US population were farmers in 1800
- yield
  - one tone of grain, 10% set aside for seed
  - 10 minutes of human labour to produce a kilogram of wheat, which will yield 1.6 kilograms of bread (two loaves)

1901: one hundred years later, most wheat comes from Great Plains.  Example, Red River Valley, North Dakota

- four horses pull gang (multi-share) steel plows and harrows
- mechanical seed drills plan, mechanical harvesters cut the stalks and bind the sheaves
- threshing machines are powered by steam engines
- grain is taking to tranaries
- saves about 22 hours per hectare, about 1/7 of the time it did in 1801
- use of draft animals is about 37 horse-hours per hectare (about 2 minutes / kilogram of grain)
  - Impact: about 25% of American farmland is devoted to growing fodder for draft animals.

- inorganic fertilizers are making inroads, importing Chilean nitrates and Florida phosphates
- USA stopped counting draft animals in 1961

2021: Kansas is the leading wheat-growing state; use case Arkansas River Valley.

- farms are 3-4X larger than a century ago
- most work is done by 1 or 2 people and large machinery (400 horsepower+)
- seed comes from certiifed growers
- plants receive fertilizers; nitrogen (applied as ammonia or urea), and protection from insects, fungi and weeds)
- harvesting by large combines transferring grain directly to trucks to be transported to storage silos and sold around the country or shipped to Asia or Africa.
- 2 hours labour / hectar and 3.5 tones / hectare  (two seconds labour / kilogram of grain; from 10 minutes in 1801)

### Agrochemicals

Agrochemicals fuel needs dwarfs the fuels required to power farm machinery.

- fungicides, herbicides, insecticides are high-energy-intensive products.  Applied in small quantities (fractions of kilograms / hectare)
- fertilizers, supplying key macronutrients (nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium) require less energy to produce, but are needed in large quantities
  - potassium: least costly, potash (KCI) from surface or underground mines
  - phosphate: mine phosphates and process to to make superphosphate compounds
  - ammonia: compound for making nitrogen fertilizers.  Wheat, rice and many vegetables require 100-200 kilograms / hectare.  These high-needs make nitrogenous fertilizers the most important indirect energy input in modern farming.

### Leguminous Food Crops

Leguminous crops can fix their own nitrogen supply (soybeans, beans, peas, lentils, peanuts).   They have a natural bacteria that can concert non-reactive nitrogen to reactive nitrogen and ammonia (NH3).   Cover crops (alfalfa, clovers and vetches) are also capable of creating their own nitrogen supply.  Their roots host bacteria capable of converting inert atmospheric nitrogen to nitrates.

- no staple grains, no oil crops (except soybeans and peanuts) and no tubers can produce their own nitrogen.   Crop rotation with an alfalfa, clover or vetch for a few months and till into soil to replenish react nitrogen is required.   Traditional agriculture spread manure (laborious and inefficient, low nitrogen)
- cities capture human waste and spread it on fields.  This consumed 20-30% of labour in cropping.

### Green Revolution

1909, Fritz Haber invented ammonia synthesis.  Green Revolution reliated on higher nitrogen applications.

## Energy Costs, Energy Subsidy Ladder

Fossil fuel subsidy to create food.   Ranges exist based on transportation costs (sometimes internationally, and irrigation costs)

| Food                                                         | Cost                                                         |
| ------------------------------------------------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------ |
| Bread (Carbohydrate)                                         |                                                              |
| Bread : raind-fed wheat                                      | 4 MJ/kg grain, diesel has 37 MJ/L, therefore 100ml diesel/kg grain |
| Bread: sour dough loaf                                       | 250 ml fuel                                                  |
| Chicken (Protein)                                            | 200 mL fuel/kg to 1 L/kg; average 350ml/kg<br />Farmed chicken expend very little energy due to confinement. |
| Tomatoes (Vitamin C)                                         | Plastic clips, wedges and gutter arrangements.  Plastic tarps to cover soil evaporation and weed maintenance.  Most fertilizer heavy crops (10X as much as grain corn).  Trucks, from Spain, travel 3,500km to Sweden. **650mL/kg**.  *How many vegans enjoying the salad are aware of its substantial fossil fuel pedigree?* |
| Seafood - Pelagic: Living near the surface (anchovies, sardines and mackerel) | 100mL/kg                                                     |
| Seafood: Mean                                                | 700mL/kg                                                     |
| Seafood: Wild shrimp and lobster                             | 10L/kg.   Two skewers of shrimp (100g) requires about 500mL to **1,000mL fuel/kg** (2-4 cups of fuel) |



### Seafood & Diesel Oil

Capturing seafood is the most energy-intensive process of food provision.

pelagic:  living near the surface : anchovies, sardines and mackerel

Aquaculture requires protein to feed the carnivorous farmed-fish.  The feed anchovies, pilchards, capelin, herring and mackerel must be caught.

- 2018 82,000,000 tons farmed, 96,000,000 tons wild-caught species.  Fish farming (aquaculture) has intensified the exploitation of smaller herbivorous species.  Energy costs of sea bass in cages requires 2 - 2.5L/fuel / kilogram.
- low-energy herbivorous fish, expend less energy in captivity.  Chinese carp (bighead, silver, black and grass carp) require 300mL fuel / kilogram.
  - Europe and North America do not eat carp.
  - Tuna demand is soaring (most endangered top marine carnivores) due to worldwide demand for sushi.

### Fuel and Food

Between 1900 and 2000:

- global population increased 4X (3.7 times to be exact)
- farmland grew by 40%
- anthropogenic energy subsidies in agriculture increased 90X (agrochemicals and machinery).  Represents only 4% f annual global energy use.
- USA: As more food is transported (imported) and more meals eaten away from home, and more convenience foods are consumed, the total energy for food production is approaching 20% of the total energy need.

Other reasons to change agriculture status-quo:

- loss of biodiversity
- creation of dead zones in coastal waters

### Can We Go Back

- USA would need 25,000,000 horses, and people to spread their manure (or find green rotation crops).  You need 10-40 times as much manure as urea nitrogen fertilizer for same amount of nitrogen.
- Eat less meat, waste less food, however replacing 110 megatons of nitrogen by organic sources is theoretically impossible.
  - central animal feed waste has heavy metals and drug residues from feed additives
  - human waste pathogens must be destroyed by high-eat sterilization, but this does kill all bacteria nor remove all heavy metals.
  - reducing food waste is low-hanging fruit (UK study showed 70% of food waste was edible), but there is no desire to reduce waste

# 3. Understanding Material World

Media attention focuses on national debt ratios (not important in Modern Monetary Theory), GDP growth rates, mobile 5G connectivity and AI transforming lives.   Media does not report on existential necessities; food and energy.  The man made materials (human made materials); metals, alloys, non-metallic & synthetic compounds.  

Civilization can be accomplised and affluent without computers.  Without computers, civilization can succeed with:

- food supply
- material comforts
- education
- health care

Four indispensable materials; you cannot rank them in terms of importance as they are all essential:

| Material | 2019 Consumption   |
| -------- | ------------------ |
| Cement   | 4,900,000,000 tons |
| Steel    | 1,800,000,000 tons |
| Plastic  | 370,000,000 tons   |
| Ammonia  | 150,000,000 tons   |

The production of these four essential material:

- consumes 17% of world's primary energy supply
- 25% of CO<sub>2</sub> emissions in combustion of fossil fuels

## Ammonia

Ammonia (NH<sub>3</sub>), is in the top position, as it would be impossible to feed 40% of today's population without it.  Ammonia is an existential constraint that does not apply to cement, steel or plastic.

Synthesis of ammonia is difficult.

- Accidental Discoveries:  inventions have led to accidental discoveries, Teflon.  Tetrafluoroethylene as a refrigerant compound.  When stored in refrigerate cylinders, it polymerized and turned into polytetrafluorethylene (white, waxy, slippery powder).  Post WWII Teflon was the best-known synthetic material.
- Deliberate Discovery:  Between 1850 to1900 the population of industrialized countries of Europe and North America grew from 300 million to 500 million.  The need for more food, and crop yields remained stagnant.  In this time period 200 million hectares of North & South America, Russia and Australia were converted to grain fields.   
- Phosphates mined first in North Caolina and then in Florida.
- Ammonia started with mining of guano from dry tropical islands, and importing Chilean nitrates.

Synthesis invented in 1908 by Fritz Haber a professor of physical chemistry and electrochemistry, supported by BASF.  Solution used an iron catalyst and deploying a reaction pressure.

- scaling this process was a major feat.   Carl Bosch (an chemical and metallurgical engineer) from BASF succeed in four years.   First ammonia synthesis plat in Oppau 1913.  The process is known as the **Haber-Bosch process[^3]**.  Spreading manure was still most popular method even in the 1950's.  Haber-Bosch synthesis of ammonia is perhaps the most momentous technical advance in history
- Green Revolution started in the 1960's enabled by ammonia production (30 million tons).  Key innovations was using natural gas as source of hydrogen, and centrifugal compressors, and better catalysts.

### China

Post-Mao China took the lead in ammonia production:

- Mao was responsible for the eadlinest famine in history 1958-1961.  Mao, declared communist state in 1949, died in 1976.
- China ordered 13 ammonia urea plants from M.W. Kellog (Texax) after President Nixon's trip to China Beijing in 1972.
  - 1972 China abolished food rationing
  - 2000 China's data per capita food supply was higher than Japan's.
  - 60% of China's ammonia is synthetically produced

Conserving Ammonia

Spreading ammonia on fields results in loses of ammonia - volatization.  The only effective solutions to fields loses are:

- spreading expensive slow-release compounds
- using precision farming; applying fertilizers based on analyses of soil

### Africa

Africa is the fasted growing population and does not have access to ammonia.  Africa is a food importer.  For Africa to be food self sufficient will require the use of ammonia.   

### Hopeful Invention

- Radical: Genetic engineering create a non-leguminous plat with nitrogen-fixing capabilities.
- Less Radical:  Inoculate seeds with bacterium for the generation of nitrogen

## Plastics

Plastics are fit for moulding/forming.  Two key monomers are ethylene and propylene are produced by steam cracking (heating to 750-950<sup>o</sup>C).

- thermoplastics: soften when heated, dominate global output.  
  - 20% low and high-density polyethylene (PE)
  - 15% polypropylene (PP)
  - 10% polyvinyl chloride (PVC)
  - applications: heavy-duty pipes, flanges, anti-skid surfaces, chemical tanks, car interiors and exteriors, flame-retardant applications
- thermoset plastics: resist softening when heated.   Polyurethanes, polyimides, melamine and urea-formaldehyde

PET - Polyethylene terephthalate : drink bottles (patented in 1941)

Applications:

- everywhere, first application was gear-shift knob on a Roles-Royce. 
- indispensable roles in health care. PPE (personal protection equipment); gloves, masks, shields, gowns, booties.  Flexible tubes, catheters, intravenous and blood bags, sterile packaging, bedpans, rails, thermal blankets, labware.

Environment: *This irresponsible dumping of plastics is not an argument against the proper use of these diverse and often truly indispensable synthetic materials.*

## Steel

Steel:

- alloy dominated by iron (Fe)
- 3,500 varieties of steel
- Pig or cast iron is 96% iron, 1-4% carbon and 0.5-3% silicon (Si) produced in blast furnaces:
  - high carbon makes it brittle
  - low ductility (ability to stretch)
  - low tensile strength compared to bronze or brass

Four categories of steel:

- Carbon steels: 90% of all steels are 0.3 to 0.95% carbon): bridges, fridges, gears and shears

- Alloy steels: one or more elements of manganese, nickel, silicon, chromium, aluminium, molybdenum, titanium and vanadium:  Added to improve a physical property: hardness, strength, ductility.

- Stainless steel: 10-20% chromium.  Surgical instruments, engines, machine parts and construction

- Tool steels: 2-4X tensile strength of construction steels.

Steel is used everywhere; oil rigs, cars, buildings.  Can we secure an adequate supply of steel?

- do we have adequate supplies of iron ore?  Yes, iron is Earth's dominant element abundant in the crust and core.  Only oxygen, silicon and aluminium are more common.
- can we supply enough to raise the standard of living in low-income countries?
- is steelmaking environmentally friendly?
- can we produce steel without using fossil fuels?

Recycling steel is possible with an electric arc furnace (EAF).  1,800<sup>o</sup>C electric arcs.  An EAF consumes as much electricity as a USA city of 150,000 people.

The energy requirement of producing steel (2019) is about 34 exajoules : about 6% of worlds primary energy supply.  Producing steel includes new steel and recycling steel.

## Cement

Concrete: a world created by cement.

Cement: created by heating limestone to 1,450<sup>o</sup>C with clay, shale or waste materials in kilns (100-200m long).  This clinker (fused limestone and aluminosilicates) is ground to yield fine, powdery cement.

Concrete: 65-85% aggregates and water 15-20%.

- finer aggregates (sand) result in stronger concrete
- mixture is held together by cement : ~15% of concrete's final mass.  Cement reacts to water and hardens the concerte.

1824 Joseph Aspdin patented modern cement 

- firing limestone & clay; the clinker was glasslike and looked limestone fom rthe Isle of Portalnd
- Portland cement.

1884 Ernest Ransome invented reinforcing steel bars (re-bar)

Robert Maillart: Swiss engineer invented concrete bridges.  Zuoz 1901 and Tavanasa 1906.

Concrete

- bridges
- dams: Hoover Dam 1930's
- China Sanxia (Three Gorges)

World consumption of concrete annually equals the entire consumption from 1900 to 1950.

Concrete is not highly durable:

- exposed environment moisture, freeing, bacterial and algal growth, acid deposition and vibration.
- burried contrete; crack inducing pressures
- concrete's high alkalinity (fresh poured pH of 12.5) protect corrosion of steel (until cracks form)
- 20-30 lifespans, up to 60-100 years
- USA report card on infrastructure is poor for sectors dominated by concrete (dams, roads, avaition)
- concrete relics: Detroit car manufacturing, Europe's old industrial regions, Soviet plain and Siberia, defensive bunkers on Normandy and Maginot line, nuclear missile concrete silos on the American plains.

Concrete can be recycled. 

## Material Outlook

First half of 21<sup>st</sup> centry with slow population growth it is possible to meet the demands for steel, concrete, ammonia and plastic.  These industries will rely on fossil fuels and be significant contributors to the global CO<sub>2</sub> emissions.

Modernizing countries, replicating the post-1990 Chinese experience, will require:

- 15X increase in steel output

- 10X increase in cement production

- 2X ammonia synthesis

- 30X increase in plastic synthesis

Material dependence examples:

large wind turbines: green electricity:  Foundations are reinforced concrete, their towers, nacelles and rotors are steel, blades are plastic resins.  Transported by giant trucks, erected by steel cranes.  Operation requires gear-boxes lubricated by oil. 

electric cars: Lithium car battery of 450kg has 11kg of lithium and 14kg of cobalt, 27kg of nickel and 40kg of copper, 50kg graphite and 181kg of steel, aluminium and plastic.

- 40 tons of ore must be processed for a single car (extracting about 225 tons of raw materials).   Today, 100,000,000 cars are produced annually.
- if by 2050 25-50% of the global car fleet is electric would result in: 18X demand for lithium, 18X demand for cobalt, 28X demand for nickel.

*Until all energies used to extract and process these materials come from renewable conversions, modern civilization will remain fundamentally dependent on the fossil fuels used in the production of these indispensable materials. **No AI, no apps, and no electronic messages will change that.***

# 4. Understanding Globalization

Globalization manifests itself daily:

- container ships from Asia bring electronic gadgets, kitchen gadgets, clothes, sports equipment
- tankers with crude oil from Saudi Arabi's to refineries in India and Japan (return empty)
- tankers with liquefied natural gas from Texas to storage tanks in France and South Korea
- Bulk carriers with iron ore from Brazil head to China (return empty to Brazil)
- Apple iPhone from Taiwanese-owned factory (Hon Hai Precision trading as Foxconn) in China (Shenzhen, Guangdong province)
- international migrations:  
  - people from Punjab and Lebanon arriving in Toronto or Sydney on jet flights
  - dinghies reaching Lampedusa or Malta
  - education seeks migrating to London, Paris or small colleges in Iowa and Kansas
  - leisure travel
- money movement, often illegal.  $20 trillion global merchandise trade, $6 trillion in commercial service.
  - global foreign direct investment: doubled from 2000 to 2019.  Now at about $2 trillion / year.
  - global currency trading $7 trillion / day
- global information flows: exa (10<sup>18</sup>) and yotta (10<sup>24</sup>) bytes of data

Understanding the modern world requires a look at multifaceted process's evolution, extent and consequences.

### Drivers

- moving jobs to countries with low labour costs (labour arbitrage)

Greatest misconception about globalization is that it is a historical inevitability preordained by economic and social evolution.

- globalization is just a human construct.
- Has globalization gone too far?  Should it be readjusted?

It is not just low labour costs:

- otherwise, sub-Saharan Africe would be the obvious choice, and, India would be preferable to China.
- in 2010-2020:
  - China averaged $230 billion in foreign direct investment a year.
  - India averaged $50 billion
  - sub-Saharan Africa $40 billion (excluding South Africa)

China's benefits over Nigeria, Bangladesh and even India:

- one-party government that guarantees political stability and acceptable investment conditions
- a large, largely homogeneous and literate population
- an enormous domestic market

- **result**: a collusion between world's largest communist state (China) and nearly all of the world's leading capitalist enterprises.

China is biggest beneficiary of globalization.

- reduced people living in poverty by 94% (between 1980 and 2015)
- loss of well-paying jobs in USA to offshoring
- race-to-the-bottom: labour arbitrage drives remuneration lower and growing inequality and new kinds of immiseration

### Globalization Origins

- Old World, 6,000 years ago.  No real globalization
- 1492 inclusion of New World
- 1519 first circumnavigation of the Earth
- East India Company (London 1600 to 1874): traded textiles, metals, spices, opium
- Vereenigde Oost-Indische Companie (Dutch East India Company) imported spices, textiles, gems and coffee from southeast Asia.   Had a monopoly on trade with Japan (1641 to 1858).
- four distinct eras of globalization defined by power/speed of transport and ability to communicate over long distances:

Globalization eras:

- wind-driven: sail ships
- steam engine and telegraph: more common trade and predictable with near-instant global communication
- diesel engines, flight and radio: accelerated globalization
- larger diesel engines, turbine, containers and microchips

#### Wind Driven Era

wind-driven: similar to limits of land travel (silk road took one year).  small wooden ships travelled slowly, had poor navigation and failed to complete their journeys.  240-day journeys.  Dutch Republic’s Golden Age (1608–1672) fueled by trade in the early modern era (1500-1800).  Ship's small capacity meant only valuable commodities (spices, tea and china)
- 1 million people made journey between 1575 and 1795.  15% died.
- the Dutch who embarked became affluent, but the wealth did not spread.

#### Steam Engine and Telegraph

steam engine and telegraph: Naviagtion improved in 1765 with sea clock.  A chronometer which allowed one to determine exact longitude (invented by John Harrison).  Speeds and capacities had to wait until steam engines replace sails, screws replaced paddlewheels and steel-hulled ships were dominant.

- Steamships crossed Atlant were prpelled by paddlewheels: 1850's 20km/hr
- Steel hulls and screws and steam engines 40km/hr
- First (short-lived) trans-atlantic telegraph cable was 1858.  By end of 18th century cable connected all continents.  Trading could consider demand and prices in different parts of the world
- First USA to UK international phone call 1927.  But costs were expensive for two generations.
- 1840's construction of railroads across Europe, North America, India, Asia and Latin America. 

#### Diesel Engines, Flight and Radio

Diesel Engines, Flight & Radio: Diesel engines provided superior efficiency and reliable performance.   Flight and radio communication evolved concurrently.

- first flight 1903 Wright brothers
- first transatlantic radio signal December 1901, first air-to-ground  1916 (French army), first commercial radio stations 1920's 
- first diesel engine on freighter : Christian X (Danish freighter) 1912

#### Large Diesel, Turbines, Containers and Microchips

Large Diesel, Turbines, Containers and Microchips: Post 1950 globalization ended in 1973 with OPEC's two round sof oil prices increases, and 15-years of relative stagnation.  Four technical advances:

- more powerful and efficient diesel enginess
- gas turbine: turbojet and turobfan.  Widebody jet.
- intercontinental shipping design (bulk carriers and containerization of other cargoes)
- quantum leaps in computing and information processing: Intel 1969 first microprocessor 4044.

### Globalization: 1970's

- Economic growth was universal except for China due to Mao's Great Famine years 1958-1961.
- era dominated by Wester Europe (Germany, UK and France) and Japan.  America's share in world trade gradually eroded.
- International travel was limited:
  - Germand id not fly to Thailand or Hawaii
  - People did not study abroad, or work temporarily abroad
  - US immigrant population peaked @ 15% before WWI and was 5% in 1970.
  - China was cut-off from work due to Mao-inspired convulsions.   No one would believe China would send masses of students to American universities to study.
  - OPEC-driven oil price increases caused globalization to falter, weaken, recede.   New politcal alignments laid foundations for new globalization.

### China, Russian and India

In the 1960's technical capabilities were ready for global integration.  Energy supply was plentiful and there was no shortage of money to invest.  The globalization process was extended to nations that did not participate in the first postwar globalization:

- political reversals allowed China, Russia and India to become major participants in global trade, finance, travel and talent flows.

#### China

Richard Nixon's visit to Beijing in 1972, and the death of Mao Zedon in 1976 are turning points in China and led to the opening of China.  In 1978 Deng Xiaoping launched economic reforms:

- privatization of farming
- modernization of industry
- partial return of private enterprise

In 2001, China joined World Trade Organization WTO).

- 1972 China had no trade with US
- 1984 was last year US had a surplus trading goods with China
- 2009 China became world's largest export of goods
- 2018 China exports account for 12% of global sales
- 2018 China trade surplus with US is $420 billion (decline in 2019 due to superpower tensions)

#### Russia

USSR unravelling in 1980's.  States detached tehmselves, and Soviet state was dissolved in December 1991.  Every major economy was no open:

- to foreign investment
- international trade
- populations permitted to travel aborad and emigrate, work and study abroad
- trade was within a framework provided by the WTO

#### India

- India has a messy electoral and multi-ethnic political environment.  India has been unable to replicate China's post 1990's rise.  China is ruled by a single party.
  - India's recent growth from 2000-2019 is a clear improvement.  GDP growth of 4%
  - India's contribution to software engineer's in the Silicon Valley is above Chinese contributions.

#### Summary

Russia is enormous supply of energy and minerals.

China is largest manufacture of consumer goods.

India is the largest supplier of software engineers in Silicon Valley

### Globalization Multiples

Express progress as multiples of capacity, rating, efficiency and performance.

| Technology    | Multiple since 1970                      |
| ------------- | ---------------------------------------- |
| Shipping      | 3X in shipping mass, 12X vessel capacity |
| Flying        | 12X airfreight                           |
| Navigation    |                                          |
| Computing     | 500X Moore's Law                         |
| Communication |                                          |

China tourists expenditures is 2X that of Americans.  Famous destinations (Paris, Venice and Barcelona) want to limit daily or annual visitors.

### Tragic impacts of Globalization

- Canada imports toothpicks and toilet paper from China, yet Canada has the highest per-capita forest resources
- rising midlife mortality among America's non-university educated white men attributed to globalization.  As production moved to China, the reasons of the deaths are despair, suicide, drug overdoes and alcohol-induced liver disease.

Global value chains[^4]:

- 18% is driven by low labour costs (labour arbitrage)

- global value chains are becoming more knowledge-intensive and rely on highly skilled laobur

De-risking global supply chains

- COVID-19 pandemic arguments for resilient supply chains.   A state's fundament role in protecting lives of its citizens.   70% of rubber-gloves produced in one factory. 
- rising US imports and reliance on Chinese transformers raise fears of spare-parts and grid destabilization
- ban on Huawei's participation in 5G networks of Western nations.
- reshoring increasing post-pandemic

# 5. Understanding Risk

The world is full of risk, but it is replete with wrong perceptions and irrational risk appraisals.

## Least Risky Diets

Japan has the highest average longevity since the early 1980's with an 85 year life exepctancy.

- Japan diet transformed in past 150 years.  Tradition diet pre 1900 was insufficient and resulted in short statuers.
- Japan consumption of milk introduced in school lunches to ward against malnutrition, and white rice became abundant post WWII.  Seafood became abundant with world's largest fishing and whaling fleet.  Meat became part of Japanese dishes, and baked goods emerged.  Higher blookd cholesterol levels and blood pressure and body weight did not lead to heart disease and longevity increased.
- Japan and US have similar food consumption as of 2015.  Biggest differences are:
  - US males consume 45% more fat, women consume 30% more fat
  - US consume 70% more sugar
- Spain: Best European life expectancy is Spanish women, with the Mediterranean diet.  Vegetables, frutis, whole grains complements by beans, nuts, seeds and olive oil. 
  - prior to 1950 Franco's Spain ate frugally (high starch diets)
  - Spain joined EU in 1986 and diet changes accelerated, by 2000 Spain was Europe's leading carnivorous nation (4X increase in 15 years, and 2X the Japanese mean).  Diary products and cheese, fresh meat and cured hams (jamones).
  - higher incomes (led to consumption of baked goods - sugar) and pop drinks.  Since 1960 sugar consumption has doubled (40% higher than Japan).  Wine drinking has declinded from 45 litres to 11 litres in 2020.  Beer is most consumed alcoholic drink.
  - CVD (Cardio Vascular Disease) has been falling since 1960 despite increase in meats, sugar, salt and fat.

## Risks, Perceptions and Tolerances

Analysis of Risks: Chauncey Starr 1969:

- voluntary and involuntary risks:  When people think that they are in control they engage in activities whose risks of serious injury or fatality may be a thousand-fold higher than th risk associated with such dreaded involuntary exposure as a terrorist attack in a large Western city.

Contrasts:

- avoiding wrongly perceived risks: refuse to inoculate children due to discredited evidence of link to autism, or implanting microchips
- fear of living next to a nuclear power plan.

Object risk is not possible.  Our risk perceptions are inherently subjective and dependent on our understanding of specific dangers.  Terrorist attacks where fear drives our rational assessment.

- Psychometric scale of Dread:  Terrorist attacks rate high due to their unpredictable timing, location and scale.  
  - Nuclear electricity is unsafe, X-rays is a tolerable risk.
  - Driving is a voluntary risk, but 1.2 million deaths a year occur.

### Life: Everyday Risks

- falling down over 70
- Alzheimer's over 80
- heart disease for males, breast cancer women

US stats for 100,000 people 2017.

| Event                  | Number                   |
| ---------------------- | ------------------------ |
| Homicides              | 6                        |
| Leukaemia              | 7                        |
| Accidental Falls       | 11                       |
| Pancreatic Cancer      | 14                       |
| Motor Vehicle Accident | 52 (kills younger lives) |
| Diabetes               | 26                       |
| Accidental Poisoning   | 20                       |
| Breast Cancer          | 13                       |

Voluntary Risk:

- Flying is 200X safer than in the beginning of the jetliner era of the 1950's.
- Asking for it risks.  Extreme adventures.  
  - Base Jumping: Jumping from a cliff.  Kjerag Massif in Norway, 1 in 2,327 were fatal jumps.
  - Skydiving:  Fatality rate was 1 in 100,000, but is now 1 in every 250,000.

Risk of Civilization Ending

- two categories viral pandemic and natural catastrophe
  - supernovas, asteroids, exploding star, collision with large comet
  - eruption of supervolcano in Yellowstone
  - geomagnetic storm caused coronal mass ejection (corona is outermost lay of the Sun's atmosphere).  One occurred in 1859, causing fires, but this predates modern communication.  Recent one in 1989 knocked out Quebec's power grid for 9-hours (Carrington Event).

### Viral Pandemics

Viral pandemics are guaranteed to reappear.

| Pandemic                                                   | Death Rate 100,000 |
| ---------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------ |
| H2N2 1957-59                                               | 38                 |
| H3N2 1968-70                                               | 28                 |
| H1N1 2009                                                  | 3                  |
| Seasonal Influenza 2007-2015 (removing pandemic year 2009) | 6                  |

Seasonal flu: 67% of deaths are among people over 65.

COVID-19: USA 81% of deaths were people aged 65 and over.



### Attitudes

People have some control.  Abstain from smoking, consuming alcohol and drugs, wear a seat belt, install smoke detectors, etc.  However people, and governments, are not able to deal with low-probability and high-impact risks.   High-impact and low-frequency risks (pandemic) are also difficult.

- hypothesis:  USA's reaction to the 9/11 attacks fulfilled Osama bin Laden's wish.  The multitrillion dollar asymmetrical wars in Afghanistan and Iraq would ultimately weaken USA.
- illustration:  Neglected low-cost measure to save lives is illustrated in USA's attitude to gun violence and mass murders.  2010-2019 125,000 Americnas killed by guns (excludes suicides), compared to 170 Americans who died in all terrorist attacks (300X difference)

# 6. Understanding the Environment

The Earth is our only biosphere.  It is unrealistic to assume the near-term possibility of leaving the Earth.   We must ensure our interventions do not imperil the long-term habitability of the planet.   There are nine critical biospheric boundary categories:

- climate change (global warming)
- ocean acidification
- depletion of stratospheric ozone (shields earth from ultraviolet radiation)
- atmospheric aerosols: pollutants reducing visibility and causing lung impairment
- interference in nitrogen and phosphorus cycles: the release of these nutrients into fresh and coastal waters
- freshwater use: excessive withdrawals of underground, stream and lake waters
- land use changes: deforestation, farming, urban and industrial expansion
- biodiversity lose
- chemical polution

Three existential requirements; breathing, drinking and eating.

## Oxygen

Oxygen:  not in danger.   2.5 billion years ago, the Great Oxidation Event.  Oxygen has been stable over the years.  21% of Earth's atmosphere is Oxygen

## Water & Food

Water:  It is not evenly distributed, and we waste water. 

- Sectors of water use: agriculture, thermal electricity generation, heavy industries, light manufacture, services, household) and categories of water.  
- Blue water: rainfall entering rivers, water bodies and groundwater storage that gets incorporated into products or evaporates.
- Green water: precipitation that is stored in soil and subsequently evaporated or incorporated into platns.
- Grey water: freshwater required to dilute pollutants to meet specific water-quality standards.

| Country       | Blue Water Consumption |
| ------------- | ---------------------- |
| Canada        | 29m<sup>3</sup>/year   |
| USA           | 23m<sup>3</sup>/year   |
| France        | 11m<sup>3</sup>/year   |
| Germany       | 7m<sup>3</sup>/year    |
| China / India | 5m<sup>3</sup>/year    |
| Africa        | 1m<sup>3</sup>/year    |

Food:  area used for food cultivation is 2X what it was a century ago.

- potassium resources will last another 90 years
- phosphate for 350 years

The challenge is the leaking of phosphorous from fertilizers to water.  The additions to water lead to eutrophication resulting in excessive growth of algae.    Decomposing algae in water consume oxygen and create oxygen-les (anoxis) waters where fish and crustaceans cannot survive.

- today examples of oxygen depleted zones are prominent along eastern and southern coasts of US and along coasts in Europe, China and Japan.

## Why the Earth is not Frozen

Greenhouse Gas Effect.  This existential imperative is the regulation of the Earth’s atmospheric temperature by a few trace gases—above all by carbon dioxide (CO2) and methane (CH4). Compared to the two gases that make the bulk of the atmosphere (nitrogen at 78 percent, oxygen at 21 percent), their presence is negligible (small fractions of a percent) but their effect makes the difference between a lifeless, frozen planet and a blue and green Earth.

| Year | CO<sup>2</sup> Levels |
| ---- | --------------------- |
| 1800 | 270 ppm               |
| 1900 | 290 ppm               |
| 2000 | 375 ppm               |
| 2020 | 420 ppm               |

CFC's outlaws in 1987 Montreal Protocol.

- the continued rise of greenhouse gas emissions will eventually lead to temperatures high enough to cause many negative environmental impacts.

### Global Warming

The media, public and politicians discovered global warming in 1988.  Scientists have known about this since:

- 1856 Joseph Fourier (French Mathematician) realized the atmosphere absorbs some of the radiation emanating from the ground.   1856 Eunice Foot (American scientist) linked CO<sub>2</sub> with global warming.  1861 John Tyndall (English physicist) explained water vapour is the most important absorber of radiation.
- 1957 *Thus human beings are now carrying out a large scale geophysical experiment of a kind that could not have happened in the past nor be reproduced in the future. Within a few centuries we are returning to the atmosphere and oceans the concentrated organic carbon stored in sedimentary rocks over hundreds of millions of years* - Roger Revelle (American oceanographer) and Hans Suess (Physical Chemist)

- the 1960's with the first global atmospheric models (long before computers).

Although we have known for generations, there have been no determined, deliberate and targeted policies.

- our efforts to reduce global warming have been by-products of higher conversion efficiencies, more nuclear and hydro generation, less wasteful processing) and production shifts (coal to gas)
- decarbonizing electricity generation with solar and wind turbines has been **negated** by the rise of greenhouse gas emissions in China and elsewhere in Asia.

## Warmer World: Oxygen, Water and Food

Oceans have an enormous capacity to absorb atmospheric heat.  

- In the late 2010's, after a few centuries of burning fossil fuels, the temperature of global land and ocena surfaces was 1<sup>o</sup>C warmer than the 20th-century mean.
- Oxygen is not affected by greenhouse gas changes in temperature.  Oxygen is declining marginally due to fossil-fuel burning.
- Water:  With a warming of 2<sup>o</sup>C water scarcity will affect more people.
  - US has lowered per-capita water use.  Water use is only 4% higher than 1965, with a 70% increase in population.
  - desalination of water will become more common.
  - higher temperatures will increase evaporation

Food:  We could lower consumption of beer, and raise the share of pork, chicken, eggs and dary products.

### Uncertainties, Promises and Realities

Our understanding of complex processes, natural factions and human actions is considerable, and steadily expanding.  Although we are uncomfortable degrees of ignorance and persistent uncertainties.   For example, COVID-19 and the global lessons learned.

- near imminent certainty that a pandemic would occur, yet surprisingly unprepared.  There have been three pandemics since the 1950s.
- national responses included dismissal, business as usual and draconian national shtudowns.

- the science of global warming, to the religion of climate change

Climate Change

- we have not taken steps to curb climate change.  Examples include lack of building codes in cold climates to the global adoption of SUVs.  Canada is mandating triple-pane windows in 2030.

- in the 3 decades since global warming became a modern topic; what has the global community done?  
  - global greenhouse gas emissions have increased by 65%
  - US, Canada, Japan, Australia and EU reduced by about 4%.   India and Chine rose by 400%.
- Fundamental realities
  - In 15 years we will surpass the 1.5<sup>o</sup>C increase in average global temperature

### Wishful Thinking

- EU researches assume per capti energy demand in 2050 will be 52% lower than in 2020 (globally).
  - In previous 30-years (1990-2020) demand has risen by 20%
  - EU basis on people moving away from consumption (owning goods), digitization and technical innovations to convert and store energy.
- Princeton University study relies on a fourth pillar (carbon capture), but this assumes the ability to capture 2X the current US crude oil production.    The production-industry has grown for 160 years with trillions of dollars invested.[^5] 110,000km of CO<sub>2</sub> pipelines in Texas.

Studies, like the EU and Princeton do not:

- discuss how the four material pillars of modern civilization; cement, steel, plastic and ammonia; will be produced with renewable electricity.
- How flying, shipping, farming and trucking (cornerstone of modern economic globalization) can become 80% carbon free by 2030. 
- sheer scale, cost and technical inertia of carbon-dependent activities make it impossible to eliminate in just a few decades.

Where we can make a difference:

- displace coal-fired electricity with natural gas; taking care to reduce transporation without methane leakage)
- expand solar and wind generation
- move away from SUVs, accelerate mass-scale deployment of electric cars
- address inefficiencies in construction, houseld and commerical energy use

### Models, Doubts and Realities

Doubt Everything: *De omnibus dubitandum* 

### Princeton Six Pillars

Reference Princeton Interim Report [^5]

1. End-use energy efficiency and electrification
2. Clean electricity: wind & solar generation, transmission, firm power
3. Bioenergy and other zero-carbon fuels and feedstocks
4. CO2 capture, utilization, and storage
5. Reduced non-CO2 emissions
6. Reduced non-CO2 emissions

# Understanding the Future

Between Apocalypse and Singularity

- Apocalypse: doom, uncovering

- Singularity: mathematical; a function assumes an infinite value.  Our knowledge will fill the universe at infinite speed.

Quantitative forecast broad categories:

- **simple & known**: processes are well known and whose dynamics are restricted to a relatively confined set of outcomes
- **substantial uncertainties**: (largest category) forecasts point in the right direction, but with substantial uncertainties
- **quantitative fables**: forecasting with numbers, but the numbers are outcomes of layered assumptions, potentially questionable assumptions.

Frightening prophecies and unrealistic promises abound.  

- extremes are easy to imagine; modelling and long-range predications will continue to err

## Inertia, mass and scale:

- 1920 25% of US farmland was devoted to feed for horses and mules
- Transitions can happen (they happened quickly in the past); energy deman was much less in 1920.  
- The global inertia behind fossil-fuels will take time to change.  For example, past 20 years our fossil carbon dependence shrank from 85% to 85% (2% decrease) based on hydroelectricity generation expansion.  Tripling our renewable electricity generation in 30-years would still leave fossil-fuels as the dominant supplier.
- **category mistake**: assigning to something a quality or action that is properly attributable only to things of another category.
  - comparing the category of "electronically enabled world" (adoption of personal gadgets, social media profiles, smartphones) with the category sufficient delivery of water, crops, feeding and slaughtering animals, converting energy, extracting and altering raw materials at an enormous scale (billions of consumers) and infrastructures.
    - replacing landlines with mobiles in a generation is not equivalent to replacing terawatts of power generation

## Ignorance, Persistence and Humility

COVID-19 compared to AI (singularity-lite) and genome editing.

- world superpower (USA) could not provide PPE for doctors and nurses
- world superpower (USA) could not provide Oxygen for patients
- as COVID was sweeping thought Europe (March 2020) USA media was discussion 5G connectivity.
- borderless Europe, competed for PPE and a EU-wide coordinate response never materlized.
- highest ranked health nations UK, France, Italy, Spain, Switzerland and Luxembourg had world's highest pandemic mortalities.  Switzerland and Luxembourg are the richest countries.

Persistence, COVID-19:

- nobody will be found responsible for the strategic lapses that guaranteed the mismanagement of the pandemic before it began
- hearings and think-tank papers will produce recommendations, which will be ignored
- **capitalism**: the profits of mass-scale single-source manufacturing will not be changed for less vulnerable but more expensive decentralized production

Persistence; Great Financial Crisis of 2007-2008

- enormous injections of new money

### Unprecedented commitments, delayed rewards

- no real progress can be achieved until top 5 countries (accounting for 80% of emissions) agree to clear and binding commitments.
  - Paris Accord:  Had no specific emission reduction targets
  - any commitment will have to last for two generations and will be expensive

# World's Primary Energy Supply

| Energy Use                                                   | Percent |
| ------------------------------------------------------------ | ------- |
| Producing Steel                                              | 6%      |
| All four elements combined (Steel, Ammonia, Plastic, Cement) | 17%     |



# Miscellaneous



## Quotes

> "Rather than resorting to an ancient comparison of foxes and hedgehogs (a fox knows many things, but a hedgehog knows one big thing), I tend to think about modern scientists as either the drillers of ever-deeper holes (now the dominant route to fame) or scanners of wide horizons (now a much-diminished group)."

> "Interest is Energy: because a satisfactory grasp of that vast field requires you to combine an understanding of physics, chemistry, biology, geology, and engineering with an attention to history and to social, economic, and political factors."

> "An average inhabitant of the Earth nowadays has at their disposal nearly 700 times more useful energy than their ancestors had at the beginning of the 19th century."

> "The economic system is essentially a system for extracting, processing and transforming energy as resources into energy embodied in products and services.”[23] Simply put, energy is the only truly universal currency - Robert Ayres

Doubt Everything: *De omnibus dubitandum* 

- the very foundation of the scientific method is to question everything
- critical perspective is required.  Acid rain was broad consensus in 1980ès, ozone depletion was infamous after Antarctic ozone hole discovered in 1985.
- decarbonize our global system cannot be compared to the telephone : mobile phone : modern internet evolution.  This evolution was the gradual progress of technology still relying on massive electricity generation powered by fossil-fuels.  

> "I am not a pessimist or an optimist, I am a scientist. There is no agenda in understanding how the world really works. A realistic grasp of our past, present, and uncertain future is the best foundation for approaching the unknowable expanse of time before us. While we cannot be specific, we know that the most likely prospect is a mixture of progress and setbacks, of seemingly insurmountable difficulties and near-miraculous advances. The future, as ever, is not predetermined. Its outcome depends on our actions." - Vaclav Smil

## Fables

- [Fox and the Hedgehog](https://conceptually.org/concepts/fox-vs-hedgehog): 
- The fox vs hedgehog dichotomy describes two contrasting ways of viewing the world. If you adopt fox-like thinking you rely on various pieces of information to form your view on an issue and think about it from different angles. You’re also willing to admit when you’re uncertain. But if you have more of a hedgehog mindset, you develop your world views and predictions with a central, overarching principle in mind and talk about your views with more confidence. 

## Interest

- Bridges:  Japan's Akashi Kaikyō Bridge, world's largest central span of 2km.  Steel towers support woven cables 1.2m in diameter.


- [Salginatobel Bridge](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Salginatobel_Bridge): Designed by Swiss civil engineer Robert Maillart.  Completed in 1930.

- [World Energy Supply Consumption](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_energy_supply_and_consumption)

- Technical Factors: Prime Movers: engines, turbines and motors. Communication and Information: storage, transmission and retrieval


### Major World Events : Globalization Setbacks

From 1913 to 1945 share of trade in global GDP fell from 14% to 4%.  Factors include:

- China: End of lat imperial dynasty 1912.  End of Quing

- WWI 1914-1918

- End of Czarist Russia, when Bolsheviks took power, and years of civil war followed, ending in establishment of USSR (1917-1921)

- Fall of Ottoman Empire and final dissolution by 1923

- Europe political instability post-WWI

- Stock market collapse of October 1929 and subsequent worldwide economic crises that lasted most of the 1930's; the Great Depression

- Japan's invasion of Manchuria 1931

- Beginning of WWII; Nazi takeover of Germany 1933

- Spanish civil war 1936-1939

- WWII 1939-1945

- China Civil War 1945-1949

- Cold War 1947

- Proclamation of People's Republic of China (PRC) by Mao 1949



## Words

- [arbitrage](https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/arbitrage): the nearly simultaneous purchase and sale of securities or foreign exchange in different markets in order to profit from price discrepancies
- arid: having insufficient rainfall to support agriculture
- [anthropogentic](https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/anthropogenic): of, relating to, or resulting from the influence of human beings on nature
- **category mistake**: assigning to something a quality or action that is properly attributable only to things of another category.
  - comparing the category of "electronically enabled world" (adoption of personal gadgets, social media profiles, smartphones) with the category sufficient delivery of water, crops, feeding and slaughtering animals, converting energy, extracting and altering raw materials at an enormous scale (billions of consumers) and infrastructures.
- [concomitant](https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/concomitant): something that accompanies or is collaterally connected with something else. *Certainly, the affluent world—given its wealth, technical capabilities, high level of per capita consumption and the concomitant level of waste—can take some impressive and relatively rapid decarbonization steps *
- Energy:  The capacity for doing work. Scalar.   Joules.
- globalization: *the growing interdependence of the world’s economies, cultures, and populations, brought about by cross-border trade in goods and services, technology, and flows of investment, people, and information* - [Peterson Institute for International Economics - What is globalization?](https://www.piie.com/microsites/globalization/what-is-globalization)
- [immiseration](https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/immiseration): the act of making miserable
- [lipid](https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/lipid): any of a [diverse](https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/diverse) group of [organic compounds](https://www.britannica.com/science/organic-compound) including [fats](https://www.britannica.com/topic/fat), [oils](https://www.britannica.com/science/oil-chemical-compound), [hormones](https://www.britannica.com/science/hormone), and certain components of membranes that are grouped together because they do not interact appreciably with [water](https://www.britannica.com/science/water).
- natural gas:  methane is main component (NH<sub>4</sub>)
- Power: measures energy per unit of time (rate).   Watts = Joules/second
- [*primus inter pares*](*primus inter pares* ): First among equals
- [proscription](https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/proscriptions): an imposed restraint or restriction. *Given the religious proscriptions on the consumption of pork and beef, chicken is the only universally favored meat.*
- R/P: Resource / Production Ratio.  The R/P for crude oil is 50 years.  The R/P for iron ore is 300 years.
- Scalar: Described only by its magnitude.  Ubiquitous scalars are volume, mass, density, time and speed.
- [Singularity](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Singularity_(system_theory)): In the study of unstable systems, [James Clerk Maxwell](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/James_Clerk_Maxwell) in 1873 was the first to use the term **singularity** in its most general sense: that in which it refers to *contexts in which arbitrarily small changes, commonly unpredictably, may lead to arbitrarily large effects.* 
- [Singularity - Mathematics](https://singularityhub.com/ray-kurzweil/): This comes from the Latin *singularis*, meaning “individual, unique, unmatched”—but in this chapter it refers to futurist Ray Kurzweil’s notion of singularity, i.e. to the mathematical meaning of the term as a point in time at which a function assumes an infinite value.[[2\]](http://127.0.0.1:5001/xhtml/14_References_and_Notes.xhtml#EndnoteNumber591) He predicts that, come 2045, machine intelligence will have surpassed human intelligence, what he calls biological and nonbiological intelligence will merge, and machine intelligence will fill the universe at infinite speed.  This is the ultimate ascension. It will make colonization of the rest of the universe an inevitably effortless endeavor.
- [strident](https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/strident): characterized by harsh, insistent, and discordant sound, commanding attention by a loud or obtrusive quality
- WWW: Wind, Water and Solar.  The renewable energies.
- [Common Era](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Common_Era) & Before Common Era.  Similar to AD/BC.  400 BCE and 400 BC are the same year.

## Authors
- [Robert Ayres](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Robert_Ayres_(scientist)): an American-born physicist and economist. His career has focused on the application of physical ideas, especially the laws of thermodynamics, to economics; a long-standing pioneering interest in material flows and transformations (industrial ecology or industrial metabolism)—a concept which he originated.  Criticises how economists ignore energy due to its low cost. His most recent work challenges the widely held economic theory of growth.
- H. T. Odum, *Environment, Power, and Society* (New York: Wiley-Interscience, 1971). *Modern societies did not understand the energetics involved and the various means by which the energies entering a complex system are fed back as subsidies indirectly into all parts of the network . . . industrial man no longer eats potatoes made from solar energy; now he eats potatoes partly made of oil.*

## Publications, Organizations

1. Foreign Affairs
2. IEA

## Tools
- [Google ngram View](https://books.google.com/ngrams/):  Allows you to see the popularity of terms that appeared in printed sources between 1500 and 2019.

#  References

[^1]: [1973 Oil Crisis](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1973_oil_crisis) : The embargo was targeted at nations that had supported Israel during the [Yom Kippur War](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yom_Kippur_War). States targeted: Canada, Japan, the Netherlands, the United Kingdom and the United States, though the embargo also later extended to Portugal, Rhodesia and South Africa
[^2 ]: International Energy Agency, *World Energy Outlook 2020* (Paris: IEA, 2020), https://www.iea.org/reports/world-energy-outlook-2020. [OneDrive - World Energy Outlook 2020](https://1drv.ms/b/s!AkwXSmFk-_xpgq1PRd51t5KYY_thJg?e=Mkvg3s).   Other publications include [Net Zero by 2050 - A Roadmap for the Global Energy Sector](https://1drv.ms/b/s!AkwXSmFk-_xpgq1SrR_6ZmZHdel_CQ?e=Mh0tI3), and [World Energy Outlook 2021](https://1drv.ms/b/s!AkwXSmFk-_xpgq1PRd51t5KYY_thJg?e=RxgxRu)
[^3]: Haber-Bosch Process 1913: Holdermann Karl. 1960. *Im Banne Der Chemie : Carl Bosch ; Leben Und Werk* 7. - 10. Tsd ed. Düsseldorf: Econ-Verl.
[^4]: [McKinsey Report . Lund et al., *Globalization in Transition: The Future of Trade and Value Chains* (Washington, DC: McKinsey Global Institute, 2019).](https://www.mckinsey.com/featured-insights/innovation-and-growth/globalization-in-transition-the-future-of-trade-and-value-chains).  [Onedrive - McKinsey Globalization 2019](https://1drv.ms/b/s!AkwXSmFk-_xpgq1VCp1XbHs3UBsi7A?e=B65K3R)

[^5]: [Princeton Net-Zero America](https://acore.org/net-zero-america-potential-pathways-infrastructure-and-impacts/). [OneDrive-World-Princeton]

## Institutions

[PIIE - Peterson Institute for International Economics](https://www.piie.com/microsites/globalization/what-is-globalization)
